docs/installation-configuration.rst, before:

============================
Installation & Configuration
============================

This section outlines basic installation procedures for Kettle, the open data ETL framework, and other necessary components. This section also discusses some suggested configurations which will allow for easier maintenance over time.

Installation consists of three parts::

*	Cloning or installing toolkit repository
*	Installing Kettle (or Pentaho)
*	Installing Socrata DataSync
*	Configuring Kettle installation

Installation on Mac OS X, Linux, or Unix
========================================

Installing ETL framework
------------------------
First, determine a location of the installation of the toolkit. All scripts, programs, and transformations related to ETL processes will remain in this directory.

Using ``git``::

	$ cd /path/to/directory
	$ git clone 

Alternatively, one can download the zip file from GitHub and extract the contents to the above directory.

Installing & configuring Kettle
-------------------------------
Next, we will need to obtain Kettle or Pentaho. Download [Kettle](http://community.pentaho.com/projects/data-integration/) and extract to the ETL directory. 

The Kettle installation should allow for easy upgrades to the data integration software without needing to reconfigure any ETLs. Likewise, upgrading to new versions should permit testing. Therefore, Kettle should be installed to a version-specific folder, such as ``data-integration-x.y.z``. Assuming the zipped file is located in ~/Downloads, one could run the following::

	$ cd ~/Downloads
	$ unzip pdi-ce-4.4.0-stable.zip -d path/to/directory/open-data-etl-utility-kit
	$ mv data-integration data-integration-4.4.0

Create a symlink between ``data-integration`` and the current version::

	$ cd /path/to/directory/open-data-etl-utility-kit
	$ ln -s data-integration-x.y.z data-integration

Future versions of Kettle can be installed and tested in it's own directory without impacting production. Once ETLs are ready to use a newer version, update the symlink to the appropriate directory.

Installing DataSync
-------------------
This framework uses Socrata DataSync to post data to the portal. This utility is *only* compatible with Socrata portals. Fortunately, this utility handles incremental updates and upserting without additional logic in the ETL. 

FILL-IN THE REST OF INSTRUCTIONS

Setting-up default directories
------------------------------
Users will need to define two environmental variables for their Kettle installation::
*	Location of the ETL directory (e.g., /path/to/directory/open-data-utility-kit)
*	Location of the DataSync installation (e.g., /path/to/directory/open-data-utility-kit/DataSync)
This configuration will only need to be adjusted once for each environment. It will also allow for each deployment of ETLs across multiple operating systems without needing to configure the ETL itself.

Launch Kettle by finding and launching spoon.bat, or, run the following in a command prompt::

	> sh /path/to/directory/open-data-utility-kit/data-integration/spoon.sh

Once Kettle launches, selected Edit > Edit the kettle.properties file::

INSERT SCREENSHOT

Right-click to insert a new line. Once a blank line is available, add ``ETL_DIRECTORY`` as a variable name and add the path to your ETL directory under value (e.g., ``/path/to/directory/open-data-utility-kit``).

Add another line and enter ``DATASYNC_DIRECTORY`` as a variable name and ``/path/to/directory/open-data-utility-kit/DataSync``

The ``kettle.properties`` file can also be manually edited. It is typically located under the following directories, depending on your current version of Windows::

	$HOME\.Kettle

Navigate to the appropriate location and open ``kettle.properties``. Add the following lines to the file and save::

	ETL_DIRECTORY = /path/to/directory/open-data-utility-kit
	DATASYNC_DIRECTORY = /path/to/directory/open-data-utility-kit/DataSync

INSERT SCREENSHOT

Test these settings by opening Kettle and looking at ``kettle.properties`` file. Find Kettle and run spoon.bat or run the following in a command prompt::

	> sh /path/to/directory/open-data-utility-kit/data-integration/spoon.sh


Installation on Windows
=======================

Installing & configuring Kettle
-------------------------------
Next, we will need to obtain Kettle or Pentaho. Download [Kettle](http://community.pentaho.com/projects/data-integration/) and extract to the ETL directory. Assuming the download is located in ~/Downloads, one could run the following::

	$ cd ~/Downloads
	$ WHAT'S THE UNZIP COMMAND SCRIPT IN WINDOWS??

Installing & configuring Kettle
-------------------------------
Next, we will need to obtain Kettle or Pentaho. Download [Kettle](http://community.pentaho.com/projects/data-integration/) and extract to the ETL directory. Assuming the download is located in ~/Downloads, one could run the following::

INSERT MORE INSTRUCTIONS


The Kettle installation should allow for easy upgrades to the data integration software without needing to reconfigure any ETLs. Likewise, upgrading to new versions should permit testing.

Install Kettle to ``data-integration-x.y.z``, where ``x.y.z`` is the version number (e.g., 4.4.0).

Create a link between ``data-integration`` and the current version::

	> cd C:\path\to\directory\open-data-etl-utility-kit
	> mklink /j "data-integration-x.y.z" "data-integration"

Future versions of Kettle can be installed and tested in it's own directory without impacting production. Once ETLs are ready to use a newer version, update the symlink to the appropriate directory.

Installing DataSync
-------------------
This framework uses Socrata DataSync to post data to the portal. This utility is *only* compatible with Socrata portals. Fortunately, this utility handles incremental updates and upserting without additional logic in the ETL.

Setting-up default directories
------------------------------
Users will need to define two environmental variables for their Kettle installation::
*	Location of the ETL directory (e.g., C:\path\to\directory\open-data-etl-utility-kit)
*	Location of the DataSync installation (e.g., C:\path\to\directory\open-data-etl-utility-kit\DataSync)
This configuration will only need to be adjusted once for each environment. It will also allow for each deployment of ETLs across multiple operating systems without needing to configure the ETL itself.

Launch Kettle by finding and launching spoon.bat, or, run the following in a command prompt::

	> C:\path\to\directory\open-data-etl-utility-kit\data-integration\spoon.bat

Once Kettle launches, selected Edit > Edit the kettle.properties file::

	INSERT SCREENSHOT

Right-click to insert a new line. Once a blank line is available, add ``ETL_DIRECTORY`` as a variable name and add the path to your ETL directory under value (e.g., ``C:\path\to\directory\open-data-utility-kit``).

Add another line and enter ``DATASYNC_DIRECTORY`` as a variable name and ``C:\path\to\directory\open-data-utility-kit\DataSync``

The ``kettle.properties`` file can also be manually edited. It is typically located under the following directories, depending on your current version of Windows::

+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| *Windows:* C:\Documents and Settings\<username>\.kettle\  |
| *Windows Vista and after:* C:\Users\<username>\.kettle    |
+-----------------------------------------------------------+

Navigate to the appropriate location and open ``kettle.properties``. Add the following lines to the file and save::

	ETL_DIRECTORY = C:\path\to\directory\open-data-etl-utility-kit
	DATASYNC_DIRECTORY = C:\path\to\directory\open-data-etl-utility-kit\DataSync

	INSERT SCREENSHOT

Test these settings by opening Kettle and looking at ``kettle.properties`` file. Find Kettle and run spoon.bat or run the following in a command prompt::

	> C:\path\to\directory\open-data-etl-utility-kit\data-integration\spoon.bat


Setting-up default directories
==============================
Kettle should be configured to read from the default ETL directory. This configuration will only need to be setup once for each installation, which permits for easy deployment across multiple computers. 

+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| *Mac OS X / Linux:* $HOME/.Kettle                         |
| *Windows:* C:\Documents and Settings\<username>\.kettle\  |
| *Windows Vista and after:* C:\Users\<username>\.kettle    |
+-----------------------------------------------------------+

Edit ``kettle.properties`` and add:

	$ ETL_Directory

This configuration also permits ETLs to be migrated in the future with minimal reconfiguration. Once ETLs are moved, edit ``kettle.properties`` to reflect the new location.

Understanding repository layout
===============================

After completing this section, the framework should resemble the following structure. Several scripts use relative directories dependant on the following layout. Any deviation will require some, but simple, reconfiguration.

*	open-data-etl-kit
	
	*	ETL

		*	Utilities

	*	Log
	*	DataSync
	*	data-integration
	*	data-integration-x.y.z

``open-data-etl-kit`` may be renamed to meet your preferences. Each directory will have the following responsibilities:

*	ETL - will contain subfolders pertaining to each ETL (e.g., hello-world). These directories will contain the logic necessary to extract and transform the data for the portal. If you use our templates, each ETL will call to the ``Utilities`` directory to complete additional tasks.
*	ETL/Utilities - will contain generic steps used by ETLs, such as sending email alerts and preparing OS-level variables to use with DataSync.
*	Log - The recommended setup will direct Kettle log files to this directory using the ETL name and timestamp. If desired, it can serve as a historical repository of ETL performance and logs for diagnostics. This directory contains serveral bash scripts (Linux/MacOS X/Unix only) that make it easier to 
*	DataSync - contains the Socrata DataSync jar file. Will be called by ETL scripts to post data to the portal. All parameters and configuration will be set in Kettle.
*	data-integration - a link which directs to the directory of Kettle being used
*	data-integration-x.y.z - the Kettle application files.

Commit message:

Added more information on Windows installation

docs/installation-configuration.rst, after:

============================
Installation & Configuration
============================

This section outlines basic installation procedures for Kettle, the open data ETL framework, and other necessary components. This section also discusses some suggested configurations which will allow for easier maintenance over time.

Installation consists of three parts::

*	Cloning or installing toolkit repository
*	Installing Kettle (or Pentaho)
*	Installing Socrata DataSync
*	Configuring Kettle installation

Installation on Mac OS X, Linux, or Unix
========================================

Installing ETL framework
------------------------
First, determine a location of the installation of the toolkit. All scripts, programs, and transformations related to ETL processes will remain in this directory.

Using ``git``::

	$ cd /path/to/directory
	$ git clone 

Alternatively, one can download the zip file from GitHub and extract the contents to the above directory.

Installing & configuring Kettle
-------------------------------
Next, we will need to obtain Kettle or Pentaho. Download [Kettle](http://community.pentaho.com/projects/data-integration/) to your computer.

The Kettle installation should allow for easy upgrades to the data integration software without needing to reconfigure any ETLs. Likewise, upgrading to new versions should permit testing. Therefore, Kettle should be installed to a version-specific folder, such as ``data-integration-x.y.z``. Assuming the zipped file is located in ~/Downloads, one could run the following::

	$ cd ~/Downloads
	$ unzip pdi-ce-4.4.0-stable.zip -d path/to/directory/open-data-etl-utility-kit
	$ mv data-integration data-integration-4.4.0

Create a symlink between ``data-integration`` and the current version::

	$ cd /path/to/directory/open-data-etl-utility-kit
	$ ln -s data-integration-x.y.z data-integration

Future versions of Kettle can be installed and tested in it's own directory without impacting production. Once ETLs are ready to use a newer version, update the symlink to the appropriate directory.

Installing DataSync
-------------------
This framework uses Socrata DataSync to post data to the portal. This utility is *only* compatible with Socrata portals. Fortunately, this utility handles incremental updates and upserting without additional logic in the ETL. 

FILL-IN THE REST OF INSTRUCTIONS

Setting-up default directories
------------------------------
Users will need to define two environmental variables for their Kettle installation::
*	Location of the ETL directory (e.g., /path/to/directory/open-data-utility-kit)
*	Location of the DataSync installation (e.g., /path/to/directory/open-data-utility-kit/DataSync)
This configuration will only need to be adjusted once for each environment. It will also allow for each deployment of ETLs across multiple operating systems without needing to configure the ETL itself.

Launch Kettle by finding and launching spoon.bat, or, run the following in a command prompt::

	> sh /path/to/directory/open-data-utility-kit/data-integration/spoon.sh

Once Kettle launches, selected Edit > Edit the kettle.properties file::

INSERT SCREENSHOT

Right-click to insert a new line. Once a blank line is available, add ``ETL_DIRECTORY`` as a variable name and add the path to your ETL directory under value (e.g., ``/path/to/directory/open-data-utility-kit``).

Add another line and enter ``DATASYNC_DIRECTORY`` as a variable name and ``/path/to/directory/open-data-utility-kit/DataSync``

The ``kettle.properties`` file can also be manually edited. It is typically located under the following directories, depending on your current version of Windows::

	$HOME\.Kettle

Navigate to the appropriate location and open ``kettle.properties``. Add the following lines to the file and save::

	ETL_DIRECTORY = /path/to/directory/open-data-utility-kit
	DATASYNC_DIRECTORY = /path/to/directory/open-data-utility-kit/DataSync

INSERT SCREENSHOT

Test these settings by opening Kettle and looking at ``kettle.properties`` file. Find Kettle and run spoon.bat or run the following in a command prompt::

	> sh /path/to/directory/open-data-utility-kit/data-integration/spoon.sh


Installation on Windows
=======================

Installing ETL framework
------------------------
First, determine a location of the installation of the toolkit. All scripts, programs, and transformations related to ETL processes will remain in this directory.

Using ``git``::

	$ cd C:\path\to\directory
	$ git clone

Alternatively, one can download the zip file from GitHub and extract the contents to the above directory.

Installing & configuring Kettle
-------------------------------
Next, we will need to obtain Kettle or Pentaho. Download [Kettle](http://community.pentaho.com/projects/data-integration/) and extract to the ETL directory. Assuming the download is located in ~/Downloads, one could run the following::

INSERT MORE INSTRUCTIONS

The Kettle installation should allow for easy upgrades to the data integration software without needing to reconfigure any ETLs. Likewise, upgrading to new versions should permit testing.

Install Kettle to ``data-integration-x.y.z``, where ``x.y.z`` is the version number (e.g., 4.4.0).

Create a link between ``data-integration`` and the current version::

	> cd C:\path\to\directory\open-data-etl-utility-kit
	> mklink /j "data-integration-x.y.z" "data-integration"

Future versions of Kettle can be installed and tested in it's own directory without impacting production. Once ETLs are ready to use a newer version, update the symlink to the appropriate directory.

Installing DataSync
-------------------
This framework uses Socrata DataSync to post data to the portal. This utility is *only* compatible with Socrata portals. Fortunately, this utility handles incremental updates and upserting without additional logic in the ETL.

Setting-up default directories
------------------------------
Users will need to define two environmental variables for their Kettle installation::
*	Location of the ETL directory (e.g., C:\path\to\directory\open-data-etl-utility-kit)
*	Location of the DataSync installation (e.g., C:\path\to\directory\open-data-etl-utility-kit\DataSync)
This configuration will only need to be adjusted once for each environment. It will also allow for each deployment of ETLs across multiple operating systems without needing to configure the ETL itself.

Launch Kettle by finding and launching spoon.bat, or, run the following in a command prompt::

	> C:\path\to\directory\open-data-etl-utility-kit\data-integration\spoon.bat

Once Kettle launches, selected Edit > Edit the kettle.properties file::

	INSERT SCREENSHOT

Right-click to insert a new line. Once a blank line is available, add ``ETL_DIRECTORY`` as a variable name and add the path to your ETL directory under value (e.g., ``C:\path\to\directory\open-data-utility-kit``).

Add another line and enter ``DATASYNC_DIRECTORY`` as a variable name and ``C:\path\to\directory\open-data-utility-kit\DataSync``

The ``kettle.properties`` file can also be manually edited. It is typically located under the following directories, depending on your current version of Windows::


| *Windows:* C:\Documents and Settings\<username>\.kettle\
| *Windows Vista and after:* C:\Users\<username>\.kettle  

Navigate to the appropriate location and open ``kettle.properties``. Add the following lines to the file and save::

	ETL_DIRECTORY = C:\path\to\directory\open-data-etl-utility-kit
	DATASYNC_DIRECTORY = C:\path\to\directory\open-data-etl-utility-kit\DataSync

	INSERT SCREENSHOT

Test these settings by opening Kettle and looking at ``kettle.properties`` file. Find Kettle and run spoon.bat or run the following in a command prompt::

	> C:\path\to\directory\open-data-etl-utility-kit\data-integration\spoon.bat


Setting-up default directories
==============================
Kettle should be configured to read from the default ETL directory. This configuration will only need to be setup once for each installation, which permits for easy deployment across multiple computers. 

+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| *Mac OS X / Linux:* $HOME/.Kettle                         |
| *Windows:* C:\Documents and Settings\<username>\.kettle\  |
| *Windows Vista and after:* C:\Users\<username>\.kettle    |
+-----------------------------------------------------------+

Edit ``kettle.properties`` and add:

	$ ETL_Directory

This configuration also permits ETLs to be migrated in the future with minimal reconfiguration. Once ETLs are moved, edit ``kettle.properties`` to reflect the new location.

Understanding repository layout
===============================

After completing this section, the framework should resemble the following structure. Several scripts use relative directories dependant on the following layout. Any deviation will require some, but simple, reconfiguration.

*	open-data-etl-kit
	
	*	ETL

		*	Utilities

	*	Log
	*	DataSync
	*	data-integration
	*	data-integration-x.y.z

``open-data-etl-kit`` may be renamed to meet your preferences. Each directory will have the following responsibilities:

*	ETL - will contain subfolders pertaining to each ETL (e.g., hello-world). These directories will contain the logic necessary to extract and transform the data for the portal. If you use our templates, each ETL will call to the ``Utilities`` directory to complete additional tasks.
*	ETL/Utilities - will contain generic steps used by ETLs, such as sending email alerts and preparing OS-level variables to use with DataSync.
*	Log - The recommended setup will direct Kettle log files to this directory using the ETL name and timestamp. If desired, it can serve as a historical repository of ETL performance and logs for diagnostics. This directory contains serveral bash scripts (Linux/MacOS X/Unix only) that make it easier to 
*	DataSync - contains the Socrata DataSync jar file. Will be called by ETL scripts to post data to the portal. All parameters and configuration will be set in Kettle.
*	data-integration - a link which directs to the directory of Kettle being used
*	data-integration-x.y.z - the Kettle application files.
